AI Act | Shaping Europe’s digital future Skip to main content en Select your language Close bg
български es español cs čeština da dansk de Deutsch et eesti el ελληνικά en English fr français ga
Gaeilge hr hrvatski it italiano lv latviešu lt lietuvių hu magyar mt Malti nl Nederlands pl polski
pt português ro română sk slovenčina sl slovenščina fi suomi sv svenska Search Search Shaping
Europe’s digital future Menu Close Menu Back Previous items Next items Home Policies Activities News
Library Funding Calendar Consultations AI Office Home … Policies Artificial Intelligence European
approach to artificial intelligence AI Act AI Act The AI Act is the first-ever legal framework on
AI, which addresses the risks of AI and positions Europe to play a leading role globally. The AI Act
(Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 laying down harmonised rules on artificial intelligence) is the first-
ever comprehensive legal framework on AI worldwide. The aim of the rules is to foster trustworthy AI
in Europe. For any questions on the AI Act , check out the AI Act Single Information platform . The
AI Act sets out a risk-based rules for AI developers and deployers regarding specific uses of AI. It
is part of a wider package of policy measures to support the development of trustworthy AI, which
includes the AI Continent Action Plan , the AI Innovation Package and the launch of AI Factories .
Together, these measures guarantee safety, fundamental rights and human-centric AI, and strengthen
uptake, investment and innovation in AI across the EU. To facilitate the transition to the new
regulatory framework, the Commission has launched the AI Pact , a voluntary initiative that seeks to
support the future implementation, engage with stakeholders and invite AI providers and deployers
from Europe and beyond to comply with the key obligations of the AI Act. In parallel, the AI Act
Service Desk is also providing information and support for a smooth and effective implementation of
the AI Act across the EU. Why do we need rules on AI? The AI Act ensures that Europeans can trust
what AI has to offer. While most AI systems pose limited to no risk and can contribute to solving
many societal challenges, certain AI systems create risks that we must address to avoid undesirable
outcomes. For example, it is often not possible to find out why an AI system has made a decision or
prediction and taken a particular action. So, it may become difficult to assess whether someone has
been unfairly disadvantaged, such as in a hiring decision or in an application for a public benefit
scheme. Although existing legislation provides some protection, it is insufficient to address the
specific challenges AI systems may bring. Risk-based Approach Compliance and enforcement
Simplification of the AI Act &nbsp; &nbsp; A Risk-based Approach The AI Act defines 4 levels of risk
for AI systems: Unacceptable risk All AI systems considered a clear threat to the safety,
livelihoods and rights of people are banned. The AI Act prohibits nine practices , namely: harmful
AI-based manipulation and deception harmful AI-based exploitation of vulnerabilities social scoring
Individual criminal offence risk assessment or prediction untargeted scraping of the internet or
CCTV material to create or expand facial recognition databases emotion recognition in workplaces and
education institutions biometric categorisation to deduce certain protected characteristics real-
time remote biometric identification for law enforcement purposes in publicly accessible spaces AI
systems that generate non-consensual sexually explicit and intimate content or child sexual abuse
(CSAM) material, such as AI ‘nudification' apps&nbsp; Prohibitions 1-8 became effective in February
2025. The Commission published 2 key documents to support the practical application of the
prohibited practices: The guidelines on prohibited AI practices under the AI Act , which offer legal
explanations and practical examples to help stakeholders understand and comply with the
prohibitions. The guidelines on the AI system definition of the AI Act , to assist stakeholders in
determining the scope of the AI Act Prohibition 9 comes into effect in December 2026 and was
introduced as a part of the AI Omnibus. High risk AI use cases that can pose serious risks to
health, safety or fundamental rights are classified as high-risk. These high-risk use-cases include:
AI safety components in critical infrastructures (e.g. transport), the failure of which could put
the life and health of citizens at risk AI solutions used in education institutions, that may
determine the access to education and course of someone’s professional life (e.g. scoring of exams)
AI-based safety components of products (e.g. AI application in robot-assisted surgery) AI tools for
employment, management of workers and access to self-employment (e.g. CV-sorting software for
recruitment) Certain AI use-cases utilised to give access to essential private and public services
(e.g. credit scoring denying citizens opportunity to obtain a loan) AI systems used for remote
biometric identification, emotion recognition and biometric categorisation (e.g. AI system to
retroactively identify a shoplifter) AI use-cases in law enforcement that may interfere with
people’s fundamental rights (e.g. evaluation of the reliability of evidence) AI use-cases in
migration, asylum and border control management (e.g. automated examination of visa applications) AI
solutions used in the administration of justice and democratic processes (e.g. AI solutions to
prepare court rulings) Starting on 2 December 2027, high-risk AI systems will be subject to strict
obligations before they can be put on the market: adequate risk assessment and mitigation systems
high-quality of the datasets feeding the system to minimise risks of discriminatory outcomes logging
of activity to ensure traceability of results detailed documentation providing all information
necessary on the system and its purpose for authorities to assess its compliance clear and adequate
information to the deployer appropriate human oversight measures high level of robustness,
cybersecurity and accuracy Transparency risk This refers to the risks associated with a need for
transparency around the use of AI. The AI Act introduces specific disclosure obligations to ensure
that humans are informed when necessary to preserve trust. For instance, when using AI systems such
as chatbots, humans should be made aware that they are interacting with a machine so they can take
an informed decision. Moreover, providers of generative AI have to ensure that AI-generated content
is identifiable. On top of that, certain AI-generated content should be clearly and visibly
labelled, namely deep fakes and text published with the purpose to inform the public on matters of
public interest. The transparency rules of the AI Act will come into effect in August 2026. Minimal
or no risk The AI Act does not introduce rules for AI that is deemed minimal or no risk. The vast
majority of AI systems currently used in the EU fall into this category. This includes applications
such as AI-enabled video games or spam filters. How does it all work in practice for providers of
high-risk AI systems? Once an AI system is on the market, authorities are in charge of market
surveillance, deployers ensure human oversight and monitoring, and providers have a post-market
monitoring system in place. Providers and deployers will also report serious incidents and
malfunctioning. What are the rules for General-Purpose AI models? General-purpose AI (GPAI) models
can perform a wide range of tasks and are becoming the basis for many AI systems in the EU. Some of
these models could carry systemic risks if they are very capable or widely used. To ensure safe and
trustworthy AI, the AI Act puts in place rules – e.g. on transparency and copyright – for providers
of GPAI models. For GPAI models that may pose systemic risks, providers should assess and mitigate
those risks. The AI Act rules on GPAI became effective in August 2025. Supporting compliance In July
2025, the Commission published 3 instruments to support the responsible development and deployment
of GPAI models: The Guidelines on the scope of the obligations for providers of GPAI models clarify
the scope of the GPAI obligations under the AI Act, helping actors along the AI value chain
understand who must comply with these obligations. The GPAI Code of Practice is a voluntary
compliance tool submitted to the Commission by independent experts, which offers practical guidance
to help providers comply with their obligations under the AI Act related to transparency, copyright,
and safety &amp; security. The Template for the public summary of training content of GPAI models
requires providers to give an overview of the data used to train their models. This includes the
sources from which the data was obtained (comprising large datasets and top domain names).The
template also requests information about data processing aspects to enable parties with legitimate
interests to exercise their rights under EU law. These tools are designed to work hand-in-hand.
Together, they provide a clear and actionable framework for providers of GPAI models to comply with
the AI Act, reducing administrative burden, and fostering innovation while safeguarding fundamental
rights and public trust. The Commission has also developed other guidance to support compliance with
the AI Act’s transparency rules: The Code of Practice on Marking and Labelling of AI-generated
Content is a voluntary tool to guide providers and deployers of generative AI systems to comply with
transparency obligations. These include a set of icons that creators, publishers and other deployers
of generative AI systems may use to disclose the artificial nature of certain images, audio –
including deepfakes – and text. The Guidelines on transparency obligations for providers and
deployers of certain AI systems clarify the scope of application, relevant legal definitions, the
transparency obligations and the exceptions. Find out more about other guidelines supporting the
implementation of the AI Act . Governance and enforcement From 2 August 2026, the AI Office and
authorities of the Member States are responsible for implementing, supervising and enforcing the AI
Act . The AI Office holds enforcement powers over GPAI models. It can request technical
documentation, evaluate models, require corrective measures and issue fines for non-compliance.
Supporting enforcement, the AI Board , the Scientific Panel and the Advisory Forum steer and advise
the AI Act’s governance . The July 2026 action plan on Cybersecurity and AI sets out a coordinated
approach to help Member States, businesses and public authorities address cybersecurity and
resilience challenges posed by the most advanced AI models. The Commission will launch a call to
increase EU evaluation capacity of AI models, before they are placed in the EU market. Expected to
be operational by 2027, this will strengthen third-party assessment of AI capabilities and risks and
contribute to the regulatory function of the AI Office. The Commission and the European Union Agency
for Cybersecurity (ENISA) will also create a blueprint to secure access to advanced AI systems for
cybersecurity purposes and establish a secure testing platform to help organisations in critical
sectors - such as energy, transport, health, finance and public administration - safely test and
deploy AI solutions. Application timeline The AI Act entered into force on 1 August 2024 and became
applicable on 2 August 2026, with some exceptions: prohibited AI practices and AI literacy
obligations entered into application from 2 February 2025 the governance rules and the obligations
for GPAI models became applicable on 2 August 2025 the rules for high-risk AI systems embedded into
regulated products ( Annex I ) have an extended transition period until 2 August 2028 and the rules
for high-risk use cases in certain sensitive areas ( Annex III ) have been extended to 2 December
2027 as a result of the political agreement on the proposal to simplify the AI Act – ' AI Omnibus '
How has the Commission simplified the implementation of the AI Act? The Digital Package on
Simplification proposed amendments to simplify the AI Act implementation and ensure the rules remain
clear, simple, and innovation-friendly. This legislative proposal (dubbed as the ' AI Omnibus ') was
adopted on 19 November 2025, a political agreement was reached on 7 May 2026 and entered into force
on 27 July 2026 . Find the final text of the AI Omnibus Regulation . As a result, a clear
implementation timeline is set for the rules governing high-risk AI systems : Rules for systems used
in certain high-risk areas — including biometrics, critical infrastructure, education, employment,
migration, asylum and border control — will apply from 2 December 2027 . For systems integrated into
products such as lifts or toys, the rules will apply from 2 August 2028 . This ensures the rules
apply when companies have the right support tools to facilitate implementation, such as standards.
These amendments were also added to the AI Act: Prohibition of AI systems that generate non-
consensual sexually explicit and intimate content or child sexual abuse material, such as AI
‘nudification' apps Reinforce the AI Office’s powers and centralise oversight of AI systems built on
GPAI models, reducing governance fragmentation Certain simplified requirements granted to small and
medium-sized enterprises are extended to small mid-cap companies (SMEs and SMCs), including
simplified technical documentation requirements More innovators will gain access to regulatory
sandboxes , including an EU-level sandbox, to test their AI solutions in real-world conditions The
interplay between the AI Act and EU product safety laws , in particular the Machinery Regulation, is
clarified, avoiding duplication between sectoral and AI rules. All this complements AI Office's
actions already in place to provide clarity for businesses and national authorities. For instance,
through guidelines, codes of practice, and the AI Act Service Desk . Quick links Any question on the
AI Act? Visit our Single Information Platform Text of the AI Act in all EU official languages AI
Pact General-Purpose AI (GPAI) code of practice Impact assessment of the regulation Study supporting
the impact assessment Questions &amp; Answers on the AI Act European AI Office Governance and
enforcement of the AI Act Overview of the guidelines on the AI Act Standardisation of the AI Act
Latest News PRESS RELEASE | 31 August 2026 Executive Vice-President Virkkunen in the US for G20
Ministerial meetings PRESS RELEASE | 31 July 2026 Commission starts enforcing AI Act rules and new
transparency requirements on 2 August PRESS RELEASE | 30 July 2026 EU launches AI Gigafactories call
to boost Europe&#039;s computing capacity and unlock more than €30 billion in investment PRESS
RELEASE | 20 July 2026 Commission publishes guidelines on transparency obligations for providers and
deployers of certain AI systems PRESS RELEASE | 07 July 2026 Commission presents EU Action Plan on
Cybersecurity and Artificial Intelligence PRESS RELEASE | 19 June 2026 Commission selects EUROPA
consortium as the winner of the Frontier AI Grand Challenge, a project to build European open-source
frontier AI model in all 24 EU languages Browse Artificial intelligence Policy and legislation
20-07-2026 Guidelines on transparency obligations for providers and deployers of AI systems
09-07-2026 Commission opinion on the assessment of the Code of Practice on Transparency of AI-
generated Content 07-07-2026 EU Action Plan on Cybersecurity and Artificial Intelligence More Report
/ Study 15-07-2026 AI Office publishes frontier AI expert findings on EU competitiveness,
sovereignty and security 13-07-2026 New feasibility study for introducing an EU-level registry of
Text and Data Mining opt-out 19-05-2026 European Commission and OECD collaborate on monitoring
national AI strategies and AI investments More Factsheet / infographic 07-07-2026 Factsheet - Action
Plan on Cybersecurity and Artificial Intelligence 08-10-2025 The Commission internal use of
Artificial Intelligence 05-06-2025 Factsheet on the International Digital Strategy for the European
Union More Brochure 22-12-2025 The rise of the intelligent edge – Insights into MetaOS 04-02-2025
Living repository to foster learning and exchange on AI literacy 04-03-2024 Horizon Europe: new
projects in AI, Data and Robotics - 2024 Edition More Related Content Big Picture European approach
to artificial intelligence The EU’s approach to artificial intelligence promotes excellence and
trust, by boosting research and industrial capacity while ensuring safety and fundamental rights.
Dig deeper The enforcement framework of the AI Act The enforcement of the AI Act is shared between
the European Commission’s AI Office, the European... AI talent, skills and literacy The Commission
aims to increase the number of AI experts by training and attracting more researchers...
Standardisation of the AI Act Harmonised standards will offer legal certainty under the AI Act,
support innovation, and position... AI Act Whistleblower Tool The AI Act Whistleblower Tool empowers
individuals to securely submit a report and contribute... AI Act complaints tool The AI Act
Complaint Tool allows individuals and organisations to submit complaints to the AI... Last update 3
August 2026 Print as PDF Shaping Europe’s digital future This site is managed by: Directorate-
General for Communications Networks, Content and Technology Digital EU on Mastadon Digital EU on
LinkedIn Digital EU on Facebook Digital EU on Youtube Digital EU on Instagram Digital EU on X About
us Privacy statement Copyright notice About Directorate-General CONNECT Language Policy Follow the
European Commission Mastodon LinkedIn Bluesky Facebook Youtube Other Contact us Report an IT
vulnerability Languages on our websites Cookies Privacy policy Legal notice Accessibility